UMiddle PBL Model
1

WE BUILD TIGERS FOR LIFE
SEVEN SCHOOLS, ONE DISTRICT
University Schools, an Innovative School District, serves nearly 1,300 students from all 36 zip codes across the Memphis - Shelby County community at five schools and two school partnerships. While our schools were first established over 100 years ago as a training site for our teacher training programs, we were officially established as a state-recognized school district in 2024 to ensure a full path for children from birth through high school graduation.
The University Schools have no academic requirements for entry, consistently rank in the top five percent of all K-12 schools in the state of Tennessee for both achievement and growth, and offer a wide range of extended learning and athletic opportunities for students.
Our three early childhood programs are all accredited and provide scholarship options for students who do not have the financial means to pay tuition for attendance.
Each of our schools is staffed by UofM faculty and staff, a majority of whom hold advanced degrees, and is a training, or laboratory school, for programs and residency support for teachers and practitioners at the University. The schools also host ongoing research conducted  across the colleges of our Carnegie R1 designated university.
UNIVERSITY SCHOOLS

UNIVERSITY MIDDLE SCHOOL

ABOUT UMS
Enrollment
270 Students
Grades
6TH – 8TH 
Demographics
Students: 49% W, 51% BIPOC
Staff: 50% W, 50% BIPOC
Class Size
20:1 Average
Supports
GATE (Gifted/Talented), Speech, Special Education, and more
Extracurricular
Art, Music/Band, Orchestra, Choir, Physical Education, Spanish, STEM, educators on faculty

UMiddle Administrators
Joy Gilliam
Executive Director
Yuriy Brodskiy
Assistant Director
Marquez Brown
Assistant Director

OUR MISSION
Our mission is to prepare a diverse body of students through project-based learning to be culturally competent, intellectually inquisitive, and emotionally intelligent leaders and learners.

Project Based Learning
7

PROJECT BASED LEARNING
PBL is…
a unique approach to mastery of state standards
authentic, collaborative, and real-world
focused on developing workforce skills and deepening critical thinking skills
rooted in learning through experience, exploration, and problem-solving

EARNING OUR STRIPES

PBL/Capstone (PBL Period)
All UMiddle students are scheduled into a block of PBL.  

In 6th grade and 7th grades, our tigers will participate in two semester-long PBL cycles and are scheduled into two semester-long PBL courses. (PBL period) One semester the PBL course project is humanities-focused and other semester it is STEM-focused.

In 8th grade, tigers complete a year-long Capstone project and are scheduled into one  full-year capstone course.  (PBL period)  

Project Based Learning (PBL) 6th/7th
For grades 6 & 7:
Two projects for the Year: One STEM and one Humanities (fall and spring)
Teachers generate the driving questions based on TN content standards.
Students work in collaborative groups.
Each project culminates with a public presentation at our STRIPES Showcase.

Example PBL DRIVING QUESTIONS
6TH GRADE STEM - What are the major issues affecting our local ecosystem, and how can we address them? 
6TH GRADE HUMANITIES - How do the choices and roles of small communities impact the overall culture of a larger society?
7TH GRADE STEM - How do our senses influence our actions and decisions, both now and in the future?
7TH GRADE HUMANITIES - How can we apply lessons from past civilizations to improve our communities?
Current: STEM 6:  What are the major threats affecting our global environment, and what can our communities do to protect our ecosystems?
Hum 6: How do the choices and roles of small communities impact the overall culture of a larger society? STEM 7:  How do our senses influence our actions and decisions, both now and in the future? Hum 7: What lessons from historical civilizations may help solve modern challenges?


8th GRADE CAPSTONE
Self-guided research projects aligned to one of four Capstone Clusters: Arts and Humanities, Community Issues, Sports & Health Sciences, STEM
Chosen by the student
Demonstrations of an interdisciplinary application of knowledge and skills gained in middle school
Year-long with a culminating presentation to a public audience at Capstone Showcase.
8th Grade Capstone Projects are: 

8th GRADE CAPSTONE
Arts and Humanities: 
CTE Mega Cluster: Creating and experience (CTE CC- Arts/Entertainment and Design)
UHS Career Pathways
Primary: Humanities
Secondary: Entrepreneurship
Community Issues: 
CTE Meta Clusters: Improving Society; Cultivating Resources
UHS Career Pathways
Primary: Public Health
Secondary: Entrepreneurship
8th Grade Capstone Project Clusters  are aligned to the TN CTE Meta Clusters and UHS Career Pathways
Sports & Health Sciences: 
CTE Meta Cluster: Improving Society 
UHS Career Pathways
Primary: Sport and Human Performance; Public Health
STEM
CTE Meta Clusters: Crosscutting Sectors
UHS Career Pathways
Primary: Engineering; Cybersecurity
Secondary: Entrepreneurship


CURRENT CAPSTONE TOPICS
STEM: How can we make STEM resources accessible to underserved Memphis schools and communities?
Humanities/Arts: How can visual storytelling be used as a tool for middle school students to explore, express, and normalize complex emotions and feelings in a way that fosters self-awareness and encourages empathetic connections with their peers?
Community Issues: How does social isolation impact depression rates among middle schoolers and what strategies can we use to reduce its effects?
Sports and Health Sciences: How can we motivate the youth to build and maintain healthy habits through physical activities? 
Sports and Health Sciences: What are some strategies to prevent injuries in middle school athletes?
